
Less cured and processed meat such as bacon, sausages and ham
Less red meat and more fish
More fibre from cereals, beans, fruit and vegetables
More fruit More vegetables, especially green and leafy vegetables
Calcium rich foods, such as milk, yoghurt, or cheese
Limiting alcohol may reduce the risk of bowel cancer. 

A diet high in fat is generally thought of as unhealthy, but is not a particular factor for bowel cancer. For the sake of your general health, it is a good idea to cut down on fat, particularly animal fat. Try not to use too much fat or oil in cooking. If you do use oil, olive oil is best. Any polyunsaturated vegetable oil (for example, sunflower oil) is much better than animal fat such as lard or butter.

Keeping a healthy body weight is a great way to help reduce your risk of cancer. It is estimated that overweight and obesity causes around 17,000 cases of cancer each year in the UK.

 
The Ten Top Tips:
The tips are simple habits that people can permanently fit into their daily routines. Keeping up all ten tips in the long term will help you lose weight and keep it off.

Keep to your meal routine. Try to eat at roughly the same times each day, whether this is two or five times a day. This will help you to avoid unplanned meals and snacks which are often high in calories.
Go reduced fat. Choose reduced fat versions of foods such as dairy products, spreads and salad dressings where you can. Use them sparingly as some can still be high in fat. 

Walk off the weight. Walk 10,000 steps (about 60-90 minutes of moderate activity) each day. You can use a pedometer to help count the steps. You can break up your walking over the day. 

Pack a healthy snack. If you snack, choose a healthy option such as fresh fruit or low calorie yogurts instead of chocolate or crisps.
Look at the labels. Be careful about food claims. Check the fat and sugar content on food labels when shopping and preparing food.
Caution with your portions. Don't heap food on your plate (except vegetables). Think twice before having second helpings.

Up on your feet. Break up your sitting time. Stand up for ten minutes out of every hour.

Think about your drinks. Choose water or sugar-free squashes. Unsweetened fruit juice is high in natural sugar so limit it to 1 glass per day (200ml / 1/3 pint). Alcohol is high in calories so try to limit the amount you drink.

Focus on your food. Slow down. Don't eat on the go or while watching TV. Eat at a table if possible.
Don't forget your 5 a day. Eat at least five portions of fruit and vegetables a day, whether fresh, frozen or tinned (400g in total).
