The best way to reduce the risk of vaginal cancer is to avoid known risk factors and to find and treat any vaginal pre-cancers. But since many women with vaginal cancer have no known risk factors, it is not possible to completely prevent this disease.

Avoid HPV exposure

Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) is a risk factor for vaginal cancer. In women, HPV infections occur mainly at younger ages and are less common in women over 30. The reason for this is not clear. Most of these infections in young women disappear, but in some cases the HPV DNA remains inside cells of a woman's cervix and vagina. This can lead to pre-cancerous changes and even to cancer many years later.

Certain types of sexual behavior increase a woman's risk of getting a genital HPV infection, such as:

Having sex at an early age
Having many sex partners
Having a partner who has had many sex partners
Having sex with uncircumcised males
Delaying sex until you are older can help you avoid HPV. It also helps if you limit your number of sex partners and avoid having sex with someone who has had many other sex partners. Remember that HPV can be present for years without causing any symptoms. It does not always cause warts or any other symptoms. Someone can have the virus and pass it on without knowing it.

HPV and men

The 2 main factors influencing the risk of genital HPV infection in men are circumcision and the number of sexual partners. Men who are circumcised (have had the foreskin of the penis removed) have a lower chance of becoming and staying infected with HPV.

Men who have not been circumcised are more likely to be infected with HPV and pass it on to their partners. The reasons for this are unclear. It may be that the skin on the glans of the penis goes through changes that make it more resistant to HPV infection. Another theory is that the surface of the foreskin (which is removed by circumcision) is more easily infected by HPV. Still, circumcision does not completely protect against HPV infection - men who are circumcised can still get HPV and pass it on to their partners.

The risk of being infected with HPV is also strongly linked to having many sexual partners (over a man's lifetime).

Condoms and HPV

Condoms ("rubbers") provide some protection against HPV. One study found that when condoms are used correctly every time sex occurs, they can lower the HPV infection rate by about 70%. Condoms cannot protect completely because they don't cover every possible HPV-infected area of the body, such as skin on the genital or anal area. Still, condoms do provide some protection against HPV, and they also protect against HIV and some other sexually transmitted diseases. Condoms (when used by the male partner) also seem to help genital HPV infections clear (go away) faster in both women and men.

Get vaccinated

A vaccine called Gardasil® can help protect against infection with HPV subtypes 16 and 18 (as well as 6 and 11). In studies, this vaccine was found to prevent anal and genital warts caused by HPV types 6 and 11 and to prevent anal, vulvar, vaginal, and cervical cancers and pre-cancers caused by types 16 and 18.

This vaccine can only be used to prevent HPV infection -- it does not help treat an existing infection. To be most effective, the vaccine should be given before a person becomes sexually active.

Gardasil® was originally only approved for use in women to prevent cervical cancer, but it is now also approved to prevent vulvar and vaginal cancers and pre-cancers (in women) and to prevent anal cancers and pre-cancers in both men and women. It is also approved to prevent anal and genital warts in both men and women.

Cervarix®, another HPV vaccine available in the US, can also be used to prevent infection with HPV types 16 and 18, but so far it has only been shown to help prevent cervical cancers and pre-cancers and not any of the other cancers linked to HPV infection (such as vaginal cancer).

More HPV vaccines are being developed and tested.

Don't smoke

Not smoking is another way to lower vaginal cancer risk. Women who don't smoke are also less likely to develop a number of other cancers, such as those of the lungs, mouth, throat, bladder, kidneys, and several other organs.

Find and treat pre-cancerous conditions

Most vaginal squamous cell cancers are believed to start out as pre-cancerous changes, called vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia or VAIN. VAIN may be present for years before turning into a true (invasive) cancer. These pre-cancers can sometimes be found during cervical cancer screening. If a pre-cancer is found, it can be treated, stopping cancer before it really starts.

Still, since vaginal cancer and VAIN are rare, doctors do not often do other tests to look for them in women who do not have symptoms or a history of pre-cancer or cancer of the cervix, vagina, or vulva.

The American Cancer Society recommends these guidelines for the early detection of cervical cancer:

All women should begin cervical cancer testing (screening) at age 21. Women aged 21 to 29, should have a Pap test every 3 years. HPV testing should not be used for screening in this age group (although it may be used as a part of follow-up for an abnormal Pap test).
Beginning at age 30, the preferred way to screen is with a Pap test combined with an HPV test every 5 years. This should continue until age 65.
Another reasonable option for women 30 to 65 is to get tested every 3 years with just the Pap test.
Women who are at high risk of cervical cancer because of a suppressed immune system (for example from HIV infection, organ transplant, or long term steroid use) or because they were exposed to DES in utero may need to be screened more often. They should follow the recommendations of their healthcare team.
Women over 65 years of age who have had regular screening in the previous 10 years should stop cervical cancer screening as long as they haven’t had any serious pre-cancers (like CIN2 or CIN3) found in the last 20 years (CIN is discussed in the section about cervical biopsies, in “How are cervical cancers and pre-cancers diagnosed”). Women with a history of CIN2 or CIN3 should continue to have testing for at least 20 years after the abnormality was found.
Women who have had a total hysterectomy (removal of the uterus and cervix) should stop screening (such as Pap tests and HPV tests), unless the hysterectomy was done as a treatment for cervical pre-cancer (or cancer). Women who have had a hysterectomy without removal of the cervix (called a supra-cervical hysterectomy) should continue cervical cancer screening according to the guidelines above.
Women of any age should NOT be screened every year by any screening method.
Women who have been vaccinated against HPV should still follow these guidelines
Although annual (every year) screening should not be done, women who have abnormal screening results may need to have a follow-up Pap test done in 6 months or a year.
